Nodejs is platform used to run JS code out of browser. Technically, it is open-source and cross platform JS runtime environment where we could develop apps both client and server using JavaScript. 
It was developed by Ryan Dahl from Joyent Technologies and is currently maintained by Joyent.
It uses the v8 JS engine that is available in the core of the Chrome browser. The Chome's JS engine is now available as a platform that can be executed on any terminal or console, there by making ur js code executable from the cmd. 

It runs on a single process without creating new threads for the user requests. It rather provides async IO operations which prevents the JS code from blocking.
Most of the operations of Nodejs will be asynchronous: UR calling functions will not wait for UR function to return, rather a call back function will be provided which will make the program extract the result after the function returns. 

With Nodejs, we can now create server side programs using JS, so it becomes a complete stack of development:
Client side: Angular(JS Framework)
Server side: ExpressJs(Framework of Nodejs)
Server: Nodejs
Database: MongoDB database(JS based Database)
MEAN stack: Mongodb, Express, Angular, Node as a stack for developing rich internet based Applications. 

Limitations:
No blocking based functions could be used in Nodejs. alert, prompt functions of JS is not allowed here. 
Nodejs runs on cmd, it is a server side program with no user interface console to control it. 

Advantages:
U dont need a fat environment to work with. 
U dont have any blocking function, there by making UR App look faster and interactive.
Promotes Async programming. 
Well suited for IoT Devices, Smart TVs, Interactive browsers and many more. 
Nodejs is installable on multiple platforms: Linix, Windows, iOS, Andriod and many other platforms.

How to run Nodejs:
From the Cmd prompt. 
Node commmand is used to run the node environment. While installing Nodejs, a PATH setting would be done by the installation process itself. if not, U should set the environment variable called Path to the location of Nodejs. 

Node provides REPL(Read, Evaluate, Print, Loop) to perform basic operations from the terminal. It is basically a program created to take inputs from the user, evaluate the statement, print it and re-run it like a loop.
Since Node 7.0, we have Tab facility which will provide auto completion. 
 



